Chapter 5 - `DataFramesMeta.jl` (#288)
JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience: contents/dataframesmeta_macros.md

## Macros {#sec:dataframesmeta_macros}

You might have noticed all `DataFramesMeta.jl` commands start with an "at" `@` symbol.
These commands have a special category in the Julia language:
they are called **macros**.

> **_NOTE:_**
> Macros are a way to perform [metaprogramming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metaprogramming) in Julia.
> We won't cover macro basics here.

> > However, if you want to find more more,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> However, if you want to find out more,
```

> please check the [Julia documentation section on metaprogramming](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/manual/metaprogramming/)
> and [Julius Krumbiegel's blog post on Julia macros](https://jkrumbiegel.com/pages/2021-06-07-macros-for-beginners/).

> `DataFramesMeta.jl` macros behave **similar** as `DataFrames.jl` functions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`DataFramesMeta.jl` macros behave **similar** to `DataFrames.jl` functions:
```

- they both take a `DataFrame` as a first positional argument
- they have in-place _mutating_ functions
  (as discussed in @sec:df_performance_inplace: the bang `!` functions)

> Nevertheless, there are some **differences** on using `DataFrames.jl` functions versus `DataFramesMeta.jl` macros.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nevertheless, there are some **differences** between using `DataFrames.jl` functions versus `DataFramesMeta.jl` macros.
```

First, using parentheses in the macro commands are _optional_, and it can be replaced by _spaces_ instead.
For example:

```julia
@select(df, :col)
```

is the same as:

```julia
@select df :col
```

We will be using the space syntax in this chapter.

Second, macros parse _static_ commands by default.
If you want _dynamic_ parsing you'll need to add `$` to your syntax.
This happens because macros treat the input as a static string.
For example:

```julia
@select df :col
```

> will always work because our intended select column command with the argument `:col` won't change in _runtime_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will always work because our intended selected column command with the argument `:col` won't change in _runtime_
```

> (the time that the Julia is executing code).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(the time that Julia is executing code).
```

It will always mean the same operation no matter the context.

Now suppose that you want to use one of the column selectors presented in @sec:select.
Here, the expression inside the `@select` macro needs to be parsed _dynamically_.
In other words, it is _not_ static and the operation will change with context.
For example:

```julia
@select df Not(:col)
```

Here the columns that we want to select will depend on the actual columns inside `df`.
This means that Julia cannot treat the command as something that won't change depending on the context.
Hence, it needs to be parsed dynamically.

> In `DataFramesMeta.jl`, we solve this by wrapping parts of the command that needs to be parsed dynamically with `$()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `DataFramesMeta.jl`, this is solved by wrapping parts of the command that needs to be parsed dynamically with `$()`.
```

The above command needs to be changed to:

```julia
@select df $(Not(:col))
```

This tells `DataFramesMeta.jl` to treat the `Not(:col)` part of the macro as dynamic.
It will parse this expression and replace it by all of the columns except `:col`.

Third, most of `DataFramesMeta.jl` macros have **two different versions**:
a **_non-vectorized_**, and a **_vectorized_** form.
The non-vectorized form is the default form and treats arguments as whole columns, i.e., they operate on arrays whereas the vectorized form has an `r` prefix
(as in **r**ows) and vectorizes all operators and functions calls.
This is the same behavior as adding the dot operator `.` into the desired operation.

> This is similar to the `ByRow` function from `DataFrames.jl` that we saw in @sec:subset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to the `ByRow` function from `DataFrames.jl` that we saw in @sec:subset.
```

## Macros {#sec:dataframesmeta_macros}

> Before we dive into `DataFramesMeta.jl` commands,
> you might noticed that all of those start with an "at" `@` symbol.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You might have noticed all `DataFramesMeta.jl` commands start with an "at" `@` symbol.
```

> and [Julius Krumbiegel's blog post on Julia macros](https://jkrumbiegel.com/pages/2021-06-07-macros-for-beginners/).

DFM macros behave **similar** as `DataFrames.jl` functions:

- they both take a `DataFrame` as a first positional argument
- they have in-place _mutating_ functions
  (as discussed in @sec:df_performance_inplace: the bang `!` functions)

Nevertheless, there are some **differences** on using `DataFrames.jl` functions versus DFM macros.

First, using parentheses in the macro commands are _optional_, and it can be replaced by _spaces_ instead.
For example:

```julia
@select(df, :col)
```

is the same as:

```julia
@select df :col
```

We will be using the space syntax in this chapter.

Second, macros parse _static_ commands by default.
If you want _dynamic_ parsing you'll need to add `$` to your syntax.
This happens because macros treat the input as a static string.
For example:

```julia
@select df :col
```

will always work because our intended select column command with the argument `:col` won't change in _runtime_
(the time that the Julia is executing code).
It will always mean the same operation no matter the context.

> Now suppose you want to use one of the column selectors presented in @sec:select.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now suppose that you want to use one of the column selectors presented in @sec:select.
```
If I search on Google for "now suppose you", I get redirected mostly to sites mentioning "now suppose that you".

Here, the expression inside the `@select` macro needs to be parsed _dynamically_.

> In other words it is _not_ static,
> the operation will change with context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In other words, it is _not_ static and the operation will change with context.
```

For example:

```julia
@select df Not(:col)
```

> Here the columns we want to select will depend on the actual columns inside `df`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here the columns that we want to select will depend on the actual columns inside `df`.
```

> This means that Julia cannot treat the command as something static that wont change depending on the context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that Julia cannot treat the command as something that won't change depending on the context.
```

Hence, it needs to be parsed dynamically.
In DFM, we solve this by wrapping parts of the command that needs to be parsed dynamically with `$()`.
The above command needs to be changed to:

```julia
@select df $(Not(:col))
```

This tells DFM to treat the `Not(:col)` part of the macro as dynamic.
It will parse this expression and replace it by all of the columns except `:col`.

Third, most of DFM macros have **two different versions**:
a **_non-vectorized_**, and a **_vectorized_** form.

> The non-vectorized is the default form and treats arguments as whole columns, i.e. they operate on arrays.
> Whereas the vectorized form has an `r` prefix

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The non-vectorized form is the default form and treats arguments as whole columns, i.e., they operate on arrays whereas the vectorized form has an `r` prefix
```

(as in **r**ows) and vectorizes all operators and functions calls.
This is the same behavior as adding the dot operator `.` into the desired operation.

> Comparing with `DataFrames.jl`,
> this is similar as the `ByRow` function we saw in @sec:subset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is similar to the `ByRow` function from `DataFrames.jl` that we saw in @sec:subset.
```
